[Music]
i have the good fortune today of
speaking with author
matt ridley who's written a number of
books uh we'll list them
in the description of the video the ones
i reviewed
this week in preparation for this
interview include
this one published in 1996 the origins
of virtue which is a
lovely investigation into the biological
origins of
morality essentially a very
thought-provoking book and a very
straightforward read for such a complex
subject
the rational optimist which was
published i believe in
2010 and which i think probably serves
as a pretty good description of
matt ridley himself that was my
impression after
after going through his work and then
more recent work
um how innovation works
and why it requires freedom
to flourish sorry and why it flourishes
in freedom
so uh it's
i wanted to talk to matt primarily
because
i've been struck in my career as a
university professor
and also on my tours talking to
thousands of people
many of whom are desperate especially
young people because they're fed a
never-ending diet of gloom and doom
um it seems to be a an armageddon like
cultural predisposition to
assume without to to only look at
evidence that suggests that the future
is going to be much worse than the past
despite the fact that the present is
much better than the past and
that's been the case for many decades i
would say
and matt's books their lovely
read during the covid crisis i would say
because of course it's
it's a very rough time for everyone i
would say with the lockdowns and the
uncertainty that reigns as a consequence
of that and
he very carefully documents the
improvements that have been made
in all around the world over the last
especially over the last 400 years this
incredible
explosion of technological intelligence
that's
produced on uh an unparalleled increase
in human
living standards by virtually any
measure
um across virtually all dimensions and
so
well that's my rationale for talking to
matt he's a
very straightforward author and despite
the complexity of the ideas and so i'm
really
happy to be speaking with him today well
jordan thank you very much it's it's a
real honor to be speaking with you and
i i'm someone who enormously admires
your uh courage and intellectual
um uh uh uh what's the word gravitas
that that
uh that you bring to discussions and i
think it's it's just fantastic to be
able to meet you
albeit online and just on that
question of optimism
it's a bit of a evangelical cause for me
this
because i was steeped in pessimism as a
young man as a boy in school
at university um i believed that the
population
explosion was unstoppable that famine
was inevitable that the oil was going to
run out that the rainforests were going
to disappear that
cancer was going to shorten my lifespan
that pesticides were going to make life
on level you know all that kind of stuff
and it came as quite a shock when i
found that the world was getting better
not worse during my life
dramatically so um and so i want to tell
today's young people
that there is another possibility um to
the
you know extinction rebellion kind of
stuff that they're being fed by
everybody um not just the education
system
but the media and their parents you know
the grown-ups i think it's quite
important to have some optimism
why is it that with nothing but
improvement behind us we're to expect
nothing but deterioration before us
that's a great quote and it's not me
it's thomas babington macaulay lord
macaulay
writing in 1830 so already then he was
fed up with the doomsters saying it
can't get better
it's been getting better in the past but
it's going to get worse in the future
and that's what every generation says
and i think so far they've been wrong
and i think there's a good chance
they're wrong now
well it might be a consequence of our of
the human tendency to overweight
negative information
right we're wired to be more sensitive
to threat and to pain than we are to
hope and and pleasure um and i suppose
that's because you can be
100 dead but you can only be so happy
and so it's better
it's better in some sense to err on the
side of caution and maybe when that's
played out
on the field of future prognostications
everything that indicates decline
strikes us more harder than everything
that indicates
that things are going to get better i
mean it's a real mystery right because
the news tilts itself very hard towards
the catastrophic
and i can't think of any explanation for
that given that
news purveyors seek attention i can't
come up with a more intelligent
explanation than our proclivity for
negative emotion
but we do have to overcome that to some
degree if it's not in accordance with
the facts
yeah this is there's a there's a there's
an interesting angle there that i think
might be a clue to what's going on
um several people have observed that we
are
less pessimistic about our own lives
than we are about
larger units so we're not very
pessimistic about our village
we're not very pessimistic about our
town but we're very pessimistic about
our country and we're extremely
pessimistic about the planet
the bigger the unit you look at the more
pessimistic people are
and of course you know so people on the
whole think their own life's going to
work out it's going to be fine they're
going to stay married they're going to
earn a lot of money you know they're
okay when they talk about themselves
and i think what that's telling you is
that your information about your own
life comes from your own experience
your information about the planet comes
from the media and that
implies to me that it's not just our
inbuilt biases that are doing this
that there is a there is a top-down
effect
from what the culture chooses to tell us
do you have any sense of the motivation
for that i mean
i don't think it's unreasonable to
assume that much of what
drives the production of the news is the
search for attention
the search for eyes and you'd expect
the news to evolve towards the maximally
attention-grabbing
form right and so
apart apart from the ability to grab
attention can you think of any reason
why
pessimism is this is the
is the sales item of the day from from
the perspective of the news companies
exactly and this is where my argument
breaks down a bit because it becomes
circular
uh because i say yeah you're right the
reason they're telling us bad news is
because they know
well they know we're interested in bad
news that on the whole we don't look at
good news stories to anything like the
same degree
so we're avid consumers of pessimism
um and that and they they they play to
that
um uh but there's another phenomenon too
which is that
good news tends to be gradual and bad
news tends to be sudden
um that's not always true of course but
it surprisingly often is true
uh you know 168 000 people were lifted
out of extreme poverty yesterday
um and the day before and the day before
and the day before it it's it's a
it's a it's it's never newsworthy
whereas 3 000 people were killed when an
airliner flew into a skyscraper
that is newsworthy um because it's so
sudden so unexpected
so it's so new well it's funny when i
when i
when i ran across statistics like the
one that you just quoted
which i think is worth repeating over
and over 170 000 people lifted out of
poverty today
could be three inch headlines every day
because it's an unparalleled event in
human history although it's occurring
every day right now
but maybe it's also because you have to
prepare for the worst but you don't
really have to prepare for the best
you know if if if the best is happening
then you can just keep on doing what
you're doing
but if the but if there's a flaw
somewhere or an error then maybe you
have to make some changes in your
behavior and that might be another
reason why we're
we're prone to seek out negative
information
and does that explain why we're loss
averse to the extent we are
well i think so i think it's the same
phenomenon
so anyways the point is is that or one
of the points is that despite
the potential adaptive utility of being
more sensitive to negative information
it can really get out of hand
right because it can precipitate say a
nihilistic attitude with regards to the
future or depression or high levels of
anxiety or
or resentment um or even hatred of
humanity for that matter if we're the
destructive species that we're always
made out to be
and so it still seems to me that
work that concentrates on demonstrating
from a historical perspective how much
better things are
getting is very much worth putting
forward so and there's a deeper element
of optimism in your work as well which
is in a sense a kind of non-naive
russoianism
i mean rousseau of course famously
believed that people were good and that
human institutions made them as
malevolent and evil as they might become
so we're naturally good and corrupted by
culture and
i think that's half the story because
we're also naturally bad and
ennobled by culture but despite that you
make a really good case in
the origins of virtue that
virtue itself that morality itself has a
biological basis and that
it's grounded in our evolutionary
history and
i'll let you if you would i'd ask you to
to
um expound on that a little bit you you
talk about
the discovery of the future and the
uh necessity of reciprocity as
driving agents in that evolution and
that's it's a wonderful idea and
it's it's a profound idea because it
does
hint at a non-arbitrary base for
for moral thinking and that's a i think
that that's been something i've been
pursuing my entire life i would say but
[Music]
well um what i set out to do
in that book and it is admittedly 26
years ago or something that i
finished writing it so i i i may have
changed my mind on one or two things
um but what i set out to do was to
persuade the reader that
our good instincts are as animal as our
bad
instincts or our good behavior is as
is as natural is as uh instinctive
if you like as our bad behavior we tend
to get i think from christianity mainly
a view that um the
the there's a deep sort of animal side
of us which is bad
but we can teach each other to be good
and i don't think that's right i think
there's just as much of an animal
instinct to be good in us
as as there is bad um because if you
look at
uh you know we are a social species lots
of species are very social and what they
tend to do is they
express various forms of kindness and
generosity and self-sacrifice towards
other members of their species
the most obvious example is that we're
nice to our children as are most
creatures and the reason we're nice to
our children is obviously because
we share their genes people who were
nice to their children tended to leave
more children behind than people who
weren't nice to their children
and so the genes for being nice to
children
thrived at the expense of genes that
were that did the opposite
but obviously it goes further than that
there are social species that
collaborate with other ones and they do
so
often with a form of that collaborate
with strangers as it were
um and they do so often with a form of
reciprocity you know you scratch my back
and i'll scratch yours i'll be nice to
you today you'll be nice to me tomorrow
um
you know when a fish visit visits a
cleaner station on the reef and allows
small fish to clean the parasites off it
it's resisting the temptation to eat the
cleaner fish
and so there's a mutual gain gain from
trade
yeah that's a remarkable example that
these cleaning stations are set up on
coral reefs
where small fish congregate often
brightly colored
and large fish line up like cars at a
gas station to have their scales and
even their teeth
um denuded of of of
parasites and and and dying tissue and
and some of those cleaning stations are
apparently tens of thousands of years
old
so yes that's that's what and because
that's a cross species collaboration you
know this is this is
you know two different species
collaborating
but i don't know whether it's in that
book or later i i
in the end come down on to the view that
um
that kind of reciprocity you scratch my
back i scratch yours
is surprisingly rare actually that
actually you can't find that many
examples there's a wonderful example of
vampire bats doing it
vampire bats that didn't get a blood
meal beg for one from their neighbor the
neighbor then
you then return the favor to the
neighbor next time that he doesn't get a
blood meal
and that way you're both better off
actually it turned out that they were
closely related these were this was to
some degree a family thing as well
so actually and and in human beings
it it isn't very common for for me to
say
look you did me a favor yesterday so i'm
going to do you the same favor today
what are the circumstances under which
that's going to happen you know i mean
i'm going to have
too much food today and you're going to
have too much food tomorrow it's it's
kind of
doesn't happen very often but we human
beings have developed
another form of exchange which is far
more powerful
which is i've got more food than i need
you've got more water than you need
i'm thirsty you're hungry we'll come to
a deal we'll we'll swap so we'll swap
different things at the same time rather
than the same things at different times
and for me that's the real insight into
how human sociality and cooperation
evolved
now i'm only here repeating what
adam smith said in um
uh the wealth of nations about the you
know the the the butcher and the baker
are not
uh giving you bread and beer because
they
want to be kind to you they're doing it
to make a living but they end up being
kind to you and you end up being kind to
them by giving them money which is what
they want well i also i also thought
that
in some sense you made a deeper case
than that too talking about
the human capacity to understand and
envision the future
i mean reciprocity requires the ability
to
view transactions across time and so as
soon as the creature becomes aware of
the future
like we have we can even engage in
reciprocal behavior with our future
selves
and that makes our self-interest a much
more complex phenomenon so
my i might define self-interest as the
impulsive pursuit of pleasure and i
i think that's a perfectly reasonable
definition
perhaps when you're talking about
animals but the the question immediately
arises pleasure over what time span and
at what cost
and i'm compelled by my knowledge of the
future to act in a way that doesn't
betray
my future self and that's very much like
acting in a
so then i'm a collective that stretches
across time as an individual and i have
to act in the best
interests of that collective and i don't
think that's very different than
acting in the best interests of other
people you know if
i'm in in my last book i wrote about the
morality that emerges from games there's
a
neuroscientist who you might be familiar
with yak pancep who studied rat
behavior in games and he showed that
if you pair two male juvenile rats
together
the one with a 10 body weight advantage
will pin
the other almost 100 percent of the time
and you might say well what that
demonstrates is that might makes right
the the stronger animal wins but if you
pair them together repeatedly
after the first bout the defeated rat
juvenile has to be the inviter of
play in the next match so
he'll invite the bigger rat to play but
over
paired over repeated pairings unless the
big rat lets the little rat win
about 30 of the time the little rat will
stop inviting him
to play right so what happens is that
you get an emergent morality which is
not the ability to win any given game
but the ability to repeatedly play a
multitude of games
and there's something in that that's
very much like what you wrote about in
in the origin of virtue and something
very much like
a complex reciprocity right so
where you store your good behavior in
your reputation
essentially and that that's of great
advantage
yeah and and there is this you know very
very simple
thing that was happening in the 1990s
when i wrote that book which was
uh the people were playing the prisoners
dilemma game on computers and finding
out which strategy worked and the
prisoners dilemma game is
is is simply um a game in which if
if you if if both players agree to
remain silent then they benefit each
other but you can make a bigger gain by
by betraying the other one but then if
he betrays you as well you both end up
with nothing
so you've got to find a way of reach of
trusting each other enough to cooperate
you're being held in separate cells and
interrogated separately is the sort of
story that's being told
and um it turned out that the
best strategy in a repeated business
dilemma game
is uh tit for tat
that is to say be nice first time around
cooperate on the first
play and then simply do whatever the
other guy did on the previous play
um so as to
punish or reward the other guy for
behaving badly or well
right so you're not a sucker with using
that strategy you're a cooperative but
you're not a sucker
yeah and and and in a sense we are
engaged in iterative repeated prisons
dilemma games all the time you know
you don't say well i'm not gonna
bother paying for this loaf of bread i'm
just gonna grab it and
run um because then i'm better off
because then you can't go back to the
shop the next day um yeah
you'll be recognized by the the police
if yeah so it's morality as the shadow
of the future in some sense
right and again this all comes back to
adam smith
i think because his his previous book
his book in 1759 not the wealth of
nations but the theory of moral
sentiments
seems to me to have a very profound
insight in me and it's taken a long time
for me to understand it
and that is that morality isn't as it
were taught to us by priests and other
people it's essentially a calculation by
us
as to what works in the society we're in
and you kind of calibrate your behavior
to find out what is moral what is
ethical and so on
and you know 500 years ago the the right
ethical thing to do
when somebody snubbed you was to um you
know challenge them
to a duel and run them through with a
sword um well that doesn't get you very
far today
uh so you we've learned that actually
you
you that we've we've we've evolved
a higher form of morality
um uh sort of gradually
by by standing back and saying
in this society what's going to get me
the best rewards
given how other people are behaving
because of course everything
everything's a moving target it seems to
me too that that's deep enough now
so imagine that the landscape that human
beings occupy is a social landscape but
it's a social landscape that extends
across
time and we've been conscious of that
for a long time
at least 150 000 years so that's about
when we
changed into the genetic we changed
genetically into the subspecies that we
are now
and so you can imagine that given
the utility of perceiving the future and
the clear benefits of reciprocal
action that that's altered us enough
neurologically so that even
conscience speaks to us internally in
terms of reciprocity
so it and then that goes that goes along
with the idea that this isn't something
taught
by priests it might be something that
priests and and other ethicists
remind us of yes so
we can have an inbuilt moral sense
that's got a biological basis that still
requires cultural activation and
modification and
the analog to that would be our instinct
for language
uh you can't teach chimpanzees language
because they don't have the biological
capacity for it or not to the degree
that we do
although some parrots can can perform
remarkable stunts in that regard
but we still have to be taught language
or we have to be at least put in an
environment where it's happening
so um exactly
and yeah so um uh yeah it
just beca you know there's a language
instinct but that doesn't mean that
every child is born speaking hebrew as
as james the second
king of england supposed to have james
the first is supposed to have thought
was going to be the case um
so um you know i would say that i've
studied
archetypal representations of moral
behavior
because i think that dramatic stories
represent various they represent various
pathways
through life like pathways writ large
right just drama is
life with all the boring bits edited out
and what drama is trying to present to
us are different modes of behavior some
of them
unsatisfactory and those would be the
bad guys and some of them highly
satisfactory and
i would say the central hero in in
in dramatic representations is someone
who's as fully reciprocal as possible
that's that's what the drama is aiming
at and and
i think that's also what you're doing
with your children when you when you
teach them to be good sports when
they're playing a game you basically say
to them
something like although you don't know
this you say something like
it doesn't matter whether you win or
lose it matters how you play the game
and the reason that matters
and this is the part you don't say
because you don't know it is that
life is a never-ending series of diverse
games
and your goal as if you want to be a
winner
is to be invited to play as many games
as possible
and what that means is that you have to
you have to have a morality
that works across the set of all
possible games and it has to trump the
morality that drives you to win a single
game
yeah and the phrase for that is
enlightened self-interest as opposed to
um short-term self-interest and i think
it's a very
important insight for me the the
interesting one is that
that connects with um economic optimism
that connects with how we got to be so
much better off because it brought us
the division of labor it essentially
enabled us to say look i'll make the
spears you make the axes and we'll both
be better off because we'll both be good
at what we're doing
and even if i'm better at making both
spears and axes than you are
it still pays me because i'm slightly
better at making spears than axes
for me to make the spears and get you to
make the axes that's the basis of trade
that's david ricardo's theory in
in one um stone age uh story
yeah so when we started to be
intelligent enough and sophisticated
enough so that
a debt could be repaid in currency other
than that in which it was accrued
and so what that meant must have meant
was that we developed the abstract
representation of
a reciprocal debt not only did we
reciprocate like chimpanzees do
do for example with grooming but we
could conceptualize the fact that we
owed or were owed and were
and then were able to to be repaid in
all sorts of different
manners so and by the way
uh it wasn't in this book but it was in
the rational optimist that i
i i did quite a diversion into the the
history of trade
and it's very persuasive that the trade
is far far older than agriculture um
that
pre-agricultural people were trading um
uh probably a hundred thousand years ago
the oldest evidence we've got is
seashells moving long distances in land
from the coast of
north africa around a hundred thousand
years ago and and they're moving these
long distances not because
somebody's walking hundreds of miles to
the seashore picking up some seashells
and walking back
but because they're going hand to hand
from tribes and we can find i think i do
tell the story in the origins of virtue
of the year euront who were
aboriginal tribe um living in
northern australia who were
getting stingray barbs as many stingray
barbs as they wanted
on the coast by catching stingrays but
what they really wanted was stone axes
and several hundred miles inland there
was a quarry that produced stone axes
and the tribe that owned that traded
with the eu euront
via several other trades and you can
actually see the
the exchange rate of stingray bubs for
stone axes
along that trail um so
that's when i think that's people being
nice to each other
when they could be fighting each other
right right well i think it was in the
origins of virtue too that you
you chased the idea of trade
down into the past even further
relating it to the strange human
propensity to share
food and associated that as well with
hunting and
i believe you use the example of
mammoths which is also an example that i
found fascinating because
obviously you can't store a whole
mammoth
but you can store it in the form of your
reputation by sharing it
and if you store it in the form of your
reputation as a generous hunter then
you can be repaid back indefinitely in
a currency that doesn't spoil so maybe
it's
and then you do outline it in this
manner human beings
share food um very
in a very egalitarian manner within
families so men and women share food
men mostly meat historically speaking
and women mostly what they gather
and that makes for a balanced uh diet
and that ability to exchange food
seems to me to be perhaps the biological
platform on which
the idea of trade per se was able to
evolve so once you can share food and
trade
and and enter into a reciprocal
arrangement with regards to food
then it isn't that much of a leap
to start do that with other commodities
especially those that might be related
to the provision of food like
stone axes or arrows or or or any any
implement of that sort
i'm rather fascinated by the fact that a
a sexual division of labor over um
uh food is very very universal and
ancient
that men hunt and women gather
essentially in in hunter-gatherer
societies
now in some societies gathering is much
more important than hunting
and in some societies hunting is much
more important than gathering like
the inuit for example is the latter case
um
and there are sort of odd types of
foraging that are neither gathering nor
nor hunting so honey tends to be
something that men
get because it tends to be that you get
it from hunting
it's like hunting as it were and um
digging up reptiles and um
rats tends to be something that women do
because it's like digging up roots
now some people think this is a sexist
view you know that i'm saying
you know a woman's place is digging a
man's place is out hunting
but i think it's just that
unlike other species we really did
invent this
really youthful distinction whereby you
got the best of both worlds
you got the protein from hunting but
you've got the reliability of food from
gathering
so on the whole you didn't go hungry but
on the whole you did get access to
protein
which was difficult thing for women to
do when they had small dependent kids
and things like that
and you can sort of see an echo in it
today that far more vegetarians are
women
um or rather far more women are
vegetarians if you like
that may and you know men just like me
more than women do so i think there is a
deep thing going on here but i've got to
be very careful talking about it because
people
are quick to get upset and think that
you're in some sense
saying something very very prejudicial
people get upset now if you accept that
there are sex differences and if you
deny that there are sex differences so
they're going to get upset no matter
what you think
so you might as well just think what you
think um
you know the advantage to that sexual
division of labor in part is that it
it provides uh additional utility for
long-term
relationships because they're actually
more because of the
the union of specialization there the
gathering and the hunting
um you're deriving your food from more
than one source it means it's more
reliable across time and it
that that's a prerequisite for the
origin of long-term pair
bonds so it's a really good thing and
no one loses in that trade and that's
well that's adam smith's point and
and the point of optimism it's funny
because economists tend to be optimistic
and biologists
tend to be pessimistic on along when
discussing questions like this but
if you make well we're on that it's just
a
this is perhaps a digression but i've
also been fascinated but it's
quite nice to challenge people and say
how about the reproductive division of
labor
we're happy with all sorts of divisions
of labor you know you hunt i gather you
um uh you work one kind of job i work
another kind of job we're we we were
prepared to
to share out absolutely everything but
the one we never
do is the reproductive division of labor
ants and bees do
they say right we're going to leave the
queen to do the reproducing
and we're all going to be the workers
imagine you know not even in england
with the queen do we expect to do that
it's the one thing we try and do for
ourselves
uh is and hang on to and and that's for
me rob's home
drives home the message of just how
universal this division of labor concept
is otherwise in our life because because
it's so shocking to try and think
of a reproductive division of labor um
it's just something we don't aspire to
okay so your optimism
it manifested itself at least in part in
your writing career with this notion
that
there's a biological origin of virtue
and so it's a fundamental instinct and
there's a universality about it which
which i think is very optimistic because
if there is a universal basis for
morality
despite its its obvious cultural
differences it means that we can
potentially understand each other well
enough to
engage in reciprocal action across even
tribal boundaries which we're obviously
capable of doing and
it it implies that we might understand
each other enough so that we could
establish something like a long-term
piece
that would be the hope um but so so
that's
that's a very fundamentally optimistic
viewpoint and then when
when you move into uh analysis of
of of innovation and trade you start
doing that with the rational optimist
you're documenting transformations that
have made life
better and and i could i could list a
couple of those and maybe we can talk
about them so
um in the rational optimism optimist for
example you
talk about the fact well you you start
by talking about
um ideas having sex and so
that's a form of reciprocity i would say
that's the exchange of information
rather than than
than goods but information is
exchangeable for goods
and so in some sense it's this it's the
abstract equivalent of the exchange of
goods
yeah but but i'm in a sense i'm being
much more literal
even than that because sex is the
process by which genes
get shuffled and you you recombine genes
with
new combinations so you've got a gene
for for fur
in one reptile and you've got a gene for
milk in another reptile and you bring
them together and you've got a mammal
that has
both fur and milk and that couldn't
happen without sex because they'd stay
in separate lineages
um so sex is the process that enables
um genetic novelties to find each other
and combine it's what makes evolution
cumulative in effect
and i'm saying that exchange has exactly
the same role
in innovation that that one one tribe
can invent
um uh you know uh one
uh gadget and another tribe can invent
another gadget
and you can't bring them together unless
they're trading
and the trading is what enables you to
to make culture cumulative
to start to say well hang on i'll have
that i'll i'll have that
um invention that was made in california
and i'll have that invention that was
made in china and i'll i'll actually be
able to benefit from both of them
so it's a very it's a very explicit
metaphor i mean it's a
it's a it's a flippant um
attention-grabbing phrase
ideas having sex and it i used it for
the title of a
ted talk and it rather caught on and the
next ted meeting i went to
they were giving out badges saying whose
uh ideas
have you had sex with recently or
something
it's a bit weird who have your uh anyway
whatever you get
well we do talk about a fertile
we do and we talk about cross
fertilization
yes yes yes and well you hope that
someone who's specialized in one area
can talk to someone who's specialized in
another and that at the border where
there aren't specialists new ideas can
be generated and
i mean i've seen that over and over when
talking to
well when looking for scientific
innovation it's it's
one of the things that's happened in the
field of psychology over the last
hundred years is that
a lot of our radical innovations
especially on the methodological front
have been
a consequence of engineers being trained
as psychologists and bringing what they
knew as engineers into the field
so a lot of a lot of uh fertile
intellectual activity happens where two
fields
rub together so to speak that's right
and and some of the great breakthroughs
in
biology came from physicists moving into
biology
you you you move from when ideas have
sex to
the idea of a better today and i was
actually going to read something if you
don't mind from your book
from page 12 which i which i liked quite
a bit it's i suppose it's funny in a
black-hearted sort of way
so there are people today who think life
was better in the past
they argue that there was not only a
simplicity tranquility sociability and
spirituality about life in the distant
past
that has been lost but a virtue too
this rose-tinted nostalgia please note
is generally confined to the wealthy
it is easier to wax allegation for the
life of a peasant when you do not have
to use a long drop
toilet um imagine that it is 1800
somewhere in western europe or eastern
north america the family is gathering
around the hearth in the simple
timber-framed house
father reads aloud from the bible while
mother prepares to dish out a stew of
beef and onions
the baby boy is being comforted by one
of his sisters and the eldest lad is
pouring water from a pitcher into the
earth and wear mugs on the table
his elder sister is feeding the horse in
the stable
outside there is no noise of traffic
there are no drug dealers and neither
dioxins nor radioactive fallout have
been found in the cow's milk
all is tranquil a bird sings outside the
window
i'm going to read the next section too
but this is it's a very interesting
paragraph because it speaks to something
that that i think
has a dramatic origin too a mythological
or archetypal origin which is the idea
of the simple life
where everyone is living in harmony with
nature and the depredations of culture
have not yet
manifested themselves and it's a
it's uh it's russoian it's russoian but
it's deep it's deeper than that
as well because it actually reflects the
truth is that there is a purity about
individual
individuals that can be corrupted by
society but you have to take the reverse
position as well if you're going to get
things balanced well then you
you add a corrective to this which is
quite comical
oh please though this is one of the
better off families in the village
father's scripture reading is
interrupted by a bronchitic
cough that presages the pneumonia that
will kill him at 53
not helped by the wood smoke of the fire
right an indoor pollution
is still a leading cause of mortality
worldwide often from the
romantic hearth he is lucky life
expectancy even in england was less than
40 in 1800 the baby will die of the
smallpox that is now causing him to cry
his sister will soon be the chattel of a
drunken husband
the water the sun is pouring tastes of
the cows that drink from the brook
and that would be if the water was good
i would say toothache tortures the
mother
the neighbor's larger is getting the
other girl pregnant in the hay shed even
now and her child will be sent to an
orphanage the stew is gray and grisly
yet meat is a rare change from gruel
there is no fruit or salad that this
season it is eaten with a wooden spoon
from a wooden bowl
candles cost too much so fire light is
all there is to see by
nobody in the family has ever seen a
play painted a picture
or heard a piano school is a few years
of dull latin
taught taught by a bigoted martinet at
the vicarage
father visited the city once but the
travel cost him a week's wages and the
others have never traveled more than 15
miles from home
each daughter owns two wool dresses two
linen shirts and one pair of shoes
father's jacket cost him a month's wages
but is now infested by lice
the children sleep two to a bed on straw
mattresses on the floor
as for the bird outside the window
tomorrow it would be trapped and
eaten by the boy well that's i love that
that section it's quite comical in a
dark
and tongue-in-cheek sort of way but it's
a great corrective to the foolish
romanticism that characterizes people's
longing for
even the near past you know um
it's not unreasonable to say that the
typical middle-class person
i could say in north america or europe
but increasingly
anywhere in the world is wealthier
by almost every measure than a
billionaire was in 1920
right absolutely and uh
you know particularly i mean i can't
remember who it was who who said just
you know just take dentistry you know
there's it's it's the
uh it doesn't matter how rich you were
in 1800
it was no fun having a rotten tooth uh
and you know
and that's a relatively basic thing that
we all
can have access to today um so
uh there's no question that in material
ways our lives are
so much better than those of our
ancestors
um and we tend to read jane austen and
think well wouldn't that have been
fun you know but actually
those are books about an incredibly
small
elite uh who were rich enough to have
candles and go to
go to dances um yes and even even in
those circumstances
their social lives were restricted
enough so that a single dance could be
the social event of an entire year
exactly and you if you didn't
um fall in love with the chinless
officer who
took your arm you might be a widow for
the rest of you i mean not a widow a
spinster for the rest of your life
um so you know it was not much fun uh
compared with today we are so lucky
everything is so good
and for me and i think i make this well
actually there's an interesting story
about this this point
um i like to talk about how
the the big theme of human history is
becoming more and more specialized as
in the things we produce and more and
more diversified in the things we
consume
so you you actually but your jobs get
narrower and narrower more and more
specialized
but your life gets richer and richer you
know because you can consume
you know movies and exotic foods and all
these different things
that's a great antithesis to the marxist
notion of
alienation in labor right because one of
the things that's attractive about
marxism and it's understandably
attractive there's two things i think
one is
the emphasis on the unpleasantness of
inequality
but the other is the idea of alienation
from the created product
but if you make the case that well you
might be alienated from the created
product with regards to the workplace
because of specialization but in the
two-thirds of the hours that you're
spending of your life when you're not
working your life is much more diverse
than it would otherwise be
and i think that kovid has probably
taught everyone that again because we're
so isolated now and stuck at home and
and and and facing the um the
restriction of all these things that we
took for granted
the the wonderful restaurants and and by
the way
we do sort of go backwards with respect
to specialization and exchange
during bad recessions so in the
depression
a lot of american families you know
found they were keeping a chicken and
growing their own vegetables again
you know you you start to do more for
yourself
and have less to consume overall um
because if you only could consume what
you produce it would be a pretty
miserable life you had to make your own
food your own lighting your own
heat you know everything like that um
and but by the way
there's a really nice story about this
concept um because
i read it in a book uh called second
nature by heim
ofek um it's a beautiful book that i
read around 20 years ago and it's laid
out this point very nicely that
we've become more and more specialized
in how we produce but more and more
diversified in how we consume
and i wrote to him and said look this is
a fantastic idea can you tell me how you
came up with the idea and where you got
it from and
how it developed and he wrote back and
said
i got it from your book the original
well that's a good that's a good
compliment the best form of question
i said but i don't think it's in my book
and he said really i guess maybe it's
not i just
you know but i thought i got it from you
but so
that's a lovely example of the division
of labour in the production of ideas if
you like
well and ideas can be implicit as well
as explicit so
it's not always obvious what ideas are
in your book you know and it isn't
all you can't put a boundary around the
ideas that even the ideas that you write
because they have tendrils that reach
beyond your understanding and so
you never know which is why i'm
something of a skeptic about
intellectual property by the way i think
copyright is
vastly overdone i think we should be
much more prepared to share i did
share the stuff that we produced but
there we go that's another
well i wonder if that if i wonder if
that that anecdote that you just related
is an indication of the the sexual
behavior of ideas
i don't know if the metaphor works but
you know
every book each every
each book is different for every reader
and the meaning of the book is actually
a complex
consequence of the knowledge that's held
by the reader
and the knowledge that's implicit in the
book absolutely
so what that means is no book is the
same for any two readers
now post-modernists figured that out a
while back and
but they they seemed to read it to
indicate that there was no canonical
meaning whatsoever in a text
as a consequence and and then slipped
into the idea that perhaps there was no
meaning at all which
i think was a major mistake but
is that is that a sexual is that a
sexual
is that process akin to sexuality as
well the fact that you have a
a reader on one part and uh and
something to be read on the other part
and a third thing emerges
as a consequence it seems like it you
need two things to produce something new
yes i i think yeah i i i think that is
equivalent i mean
we're talking books here but if we were
talking gadgets
it would be much more explicit i i i
love telling the story about
how the the pill camera was invented
it's something you swallow and it takes
a picture
a film of your insides as it goes
through and it came about after a
conversation over a garden fence in
boston
between a gastroenterologist and a
guided missile designer
that's a very good example of the the
generation of ideas at the border
between two specializations
and you wouldn't necessarily exp and if
you wonder too if there's a
if particularly robust ideas emerge as a
consequence of people from
very disparate disciplines talking you
know that would be
well this there's a i in
my latest book i i talk about a a
website called innocentive
where you can post your problems if
you're a company that's
that's got a technological problem you
can't solve you can post the problem and
say look
does anyone have a solution to this um
and
you there are ways of rewarding people
who answer yes i've got the answer for
you
it's quite well set up and a study of
the
successful solutions that have been
provided on this website
found that most of them had come
from people completely outside the field
so it really was a case that
you needed a fresh mind with a fresh
with a different
training to look at the problem from a
different direction
so i think all this goes to show that
you know we are
we are more than the sum of our parts we
operate in the cloud
um uh our ideas are um
you know again that lovely thing that um
leonard reed said that
you know if you take a pencil um there
are millions of people who contributed
to making it because somebody had to cut
down a tree and somebody had to grow
coffee for the man who was cutting down
the tree and the
wood had to go to the factory and so on
there's you know incredible number of
people involved in making the pencil
not one of them knows how to make a
pencil there isn't a human being on the
planet who knows
how to make a pencil because the person
who knows how to work in a factory
doesn't know how to cut down a tree and
so on
um so the the knowledge
the the knowledge of how to run the
human world
sits in a cloud and has done since long
before the internet cloud was invented
um it sits between brains not within
brexit why do you think then
look i mean we're we've been talking
we've been
batting back and forth the idea that
virtue itself is tightly associated with
trade and then in in some sense
they may not be distinguishable from one
another fair trade
in some manner is virtue especially fair
trade across
long spans of time and maybe fair trade
across long spans of times
with diverse communities right
um so why is it that why do you think
that
the idea of trade itself has also become
contaminated with this terrible
pessimism i mean
one of the things that characterizes if
if it's trade that
constitutes virtue and if it's trade as
well that's lifted
people out of poverty then why is it
that people who
engage in novel trade entrepreneurs say
or even capitalists for that matter why
is it that that form of trade has be
has is so easily associated with um
with so easily despised and and so
and and so frequently met with contempt
i find it baffling because you know
voltaire made the point that that
commerce tends to make people nicer um
uh you know it if if two people
are uh trading then they suddenly stop
fighting
um but they're worth more to each other
if they're alive
then well exactly um
then that seems to be a good thing like
it's a good thing to have everyone worth
more debt
more alive than dead right and and
actually
steve pinker talks about this too but
the the the
the peace that breaks out at various
times in human history
is tends to be more associated with
whether countries are trading with each
other
than whether they happen to be
democracies or any other
relationship with their political
systems so it's you know the degree of
trade
really does make a difference to how
peaceful things are i mean it doesn't
stop
war breaking out between countries that
are trading with each other but it's now
accident in the 20th century you get a
a period of huge protectionism that
precedes
the second world war i mean and to some
extent sparks it you know japan is
saying well if you're not going to trade
with me i'm going to bloody well invade
asia and take stuff for myself um well
you know i was i i
thought it was of dubious entering into
trade with communist china was a big
risk on the part of the west
yeah and when that first started to
happen
it was something that well i was
interested in and
and also concerned about but but mostly
curious
about because on the one hand you could
say well it's
why would you trade with a totalitarian
state
a cruel totalitarian state a murderous
totalitarian state for that matter
but on the other hand you could say well
maybe it would be better off for
everyone if the chinese weren't dirt
poor
and starving and if they depended on
us um in a in a
mutually beneficial manner and i would
have to say
that despite the fact that the chinese
communist party still rules with an iron
fist
that it's probably been better for
everyone all concerned that
extensive trade with china has taken
place i know the
north american and european working
class has taken a major hit because of
that although they've benefited from
cheap
manufactured items for sure but
you've got to think a chinese population
where
no one is starving and that's
completely engaged in trade with the
west is a more reliable
long-term partner than one that's
isolated and hot and
and pursuing its own destiny
yeah um i certainly thought that until
recently
i you know i thought that our best
chance of turning them into a
liberal democracy was to trade with them
um
and after all it was a great deal for us
we gave them
as don boudreaux once put it we gave
them pictures of presidents and they
gave us
um uh goods and services in other words
money
yes yes yes absolutely um
but uh but it i have to say in the last
couple of years under xi jinping
china has become something very
different from what it was five or even
or ten years ago i think um and i think
we are reaching the point where
uh it is a problem that we are um
uh buying goods off a regime that is
doing
terrible things to hong kong to the
uyghurs and
there's a moral there's a moral quandary
there but
it still seems to me even that a china
that holds a substantial amount of
western debt is
much less likely to upset the apple cart
than a china that doesn't you know
um it's not such an exact thing to have
yesterday they have an interest in the
dollar not collapsing for example
but go back to your original question
though why are people so
um uh cynical and and uh
unhappy about trade and think it's such
an evil thing
and i think in the end it's that that we
are zero-sum thinkers
yeah we find we find it hard to believe
that
uh the that somebody isn't winning
in a relationship and i suppose that's
because crooked people
crooked foolish people do try to win
yeah and for 99 of our um
four billion years of history it was
true that if someone won it was at the
expense of someone losing
um but you can see very clearly in the
rhetoric of donald trump
um the view that that that trade is a is
a
zero-sum game is is a win-lose uh
equation
and it's quite hard even for you and me
to get our head around the idea that
that
actually um uh i
you know yes i've driven a good bargain
in buying a car or house but
maybe i've been ripped off who knows you
know
well i guess okay so part of the problem
is that fair trade can revert to a
crooked
zero-sum game quite rapidly and so we're
on edge because of that
but i mean people still pursue long-term
relationships and they
still pursue friendships they still make
the assumption that reciprocal
interactions
are not only possible but also part of
what makes life
worth living a really important part and
it doesn't seem that
complicated to ex i guess you it's it's
the difficulty of extending that outward
towards non-kin or even strangers
but it's a remarkable thing that that's
possible and it'd be nice if we were
more grateful for it than we are
right the the remarkable thing about
human beings is that we do treat
complete strangers
as honorary brothers and sisters um
and how do we do that partly by building
up these
uh these levels of trust through
reciprocity over long
long period ebay is a great example of
that because
when ebay first emerged the cynics said
well you know
i'll put something up for sale that's
junk and send it to you and it won't
work and you'll send me a check that
bounces and that'll be the end of ebay
and that's not what happened is that
right off the bat almost all the trades
were fair and equitable
and and then it evolved a reputation
tracking system but even before the
reputation tracking system
the the default transaction was
precisely what it claimed to be on face
value
our reputations are very precarious it's
very easy to lose your reputation
yes uh even in quite a mobile society
it will track you down um well that's
even maybe more true
in in society now because you can lose
your reputation very easily with one
misstep on twitter
that's uh certainly true
well it's also interesting to see how
sensitive people are to
to reputation maintenance because i've
watched this intently over the last four
or five years
you see people who post something for
example on twitter
and then a small mob generates itself
around them and
might be it might not be more than 20
people who are complaining about this
particular post and almost inevitably
the person will back down with
profuse apologies and show every sign of
severe um emotional distress
and i suppose i've thought about it a
lot i suppose it's it's akin to
in some sense it's the electronic
equivalent to having 20 neighbors show
up on your doorstep you know you'd
you'd assume if you were a reasonable
person that you might have done
something wrong
even though the analogy doesn't really
hold true if you're communicating with
150 000 people and you upset
15 of them it's really difficult to
it's really difficult to say exactly
what that means
this is back to the loss of version
point because we're all
we we know this very well as authors
you you read 10 good reviews of your
books and you think well
i you know i'm embarrassed about that i
don't really deserve it or you know
it's nice a nice good review and then
one bad review
and it prays on your mind and you get
furious and you get upset
and you write a letter to the editor
saying the review is unfair and things
that we've all done
well the same thing happens with regards
to comments on social media
you know like i'm fortunate er with
regards to
what i've produced on youtube for
example because
most of it garners far more positive
commentary than negative commentary you
know and the ratios are usually
something like
50 to 1 but it's not the case that when
i read through the comments
that my mood is reliably buoyed
and that is because the the outlier
the negative comment strikes me
strikes a pang into my heart you know
and i don't want to make too much of
that because overall
i think this is like the bad news story
being more salient yes it is the same
thing well i can't i cannot see how
people who are
accumulating more negative comments
in a social media platform than positive
comments i don't see how they can
survive it
i couldn't survive it so
and then that sensitivity to reputation
i took a decision
some years ago to stop looking at the
replies to my tweets altogether and i've
never done it since and it's been very
good for my
so i'm sure sleeping and other things
i'm sure
i'm missing out on some interesting
feedback um
uh uh yeah and every now and then you
know i will look at
something specific where i've asked
someone a question or something like
that but
um but actually and i talked to a
british politician who's a friend who
was a conservative party leader and was
hugely criticized
at the time he never became prime
minister um
and uh i i said you know how do you
develop
a thick skin ian because you're still in
politics 20 years later and you're still
yeah you know you've been a successful
cabinet minister but
you've been the subject of vitriolic
cartoons and all sorts of stuff and he
says nobody develops a thick skin
you just learn to ignore the stuff and
the politicians
who decide not to ignore it but to
answer back
just drive themselves helps to be
blessed with a favorable nervous system
too and to be low in trait neuroticism
so you're not as sensitive to negative
information as you might be
so i i think so the thick skin might be
partly
a biological phenomena where you know
people differ in their degree of
loss aversion and i suspect that
public figures who manage to maintain
themselves over long periods of time in
the face of criticism are relatively
robust when it comes to their
physiological response to threat
well something i greatly admire about
you is your ability to remain cool under
pressure you know when
kathy newman is trying to rile you on
channel four news or something you're
you're
you're you're do you remain logical i
would get
my heart rate would go up i would start
to bluster
i would stop thinking and i would uh
say sort of stupid things that i would
regret
um is that something you learned or
well it's very funny because i just
hate it like i it's so stressful i find
that so
unbelievably stressful but fortunately
i think it's probably a consequence of
being trained as a clinical psychologist
right is that i can detach myself and
watch
but that doesn't mean the physiology
isn't racing like it's racing
and and it's definitely the case that
it's a very strange thing because the
negative interviews that i've
conducted the interviews where people
were attacking me
let's say have
garnered far more views than the
positive interviews
so in terms of impact on my reputation
the negative interviews have been more
beneficial than the positive ones
yeah but that's partly because you've
performed well in them anyone can
perform well when they're being
interviewed
nicely as you are interviewing me nicely
now
uh it's the the sheep from the goats
are the the the people who can can
remain cool under pressure as you do i
think it is a consequence of clinical
training i mean
because i can snap into an observer mode
and and and detach myself in some sense
from what's going on
partly because i know as well that it
isn't clear what's happening
like it might be a battle but it's not
necessarily the war
and so being under attack doesn't
necessarily mean that you're being
defeated
it's it's something like that but that's
associate that's a that's a
rationalization of the ability to detach
but i do think it's
it's it's the clinician in me that
allows for that
well the old uh bomber pilots remark
that
if you're taking flack you know you're
over the target
is is some comfort in this
yeah well i said it yes at least there's
a possibility that that's true
so so i want to ask you some more
specific
questions or or not precisely that i
would like you to discuss more
specifically if you wouldn't mind some
of the things that you've
outlined as so intensely positive and i
can throw out some
reminders these are chapter titles from
the rational optimist and
then maybe we'll move to uh to um how
innovation works
you talk about uh feeding nine billion
for example which is
that that's a remarkable story and and i
i've read it in various sources
but we have biologists in particular in
the 1960s were absolutely
certain paul ehrlich for example that we
were all going to perish of
starvation if starvation combined with
an absolute dearth of raw materials by
the year 2000
and that hasn't happened it's dec now
the biologists might say the malthusians
might say yeah yeah well we got the time
frame wrong by a couple of
decades but you know the other shoe is
still going to drop
but nonetheless when you make a
prediction you have to include a time
frame
or it's not a prediction well no but
they can't even really make that claim
because during that period not only have
we
i mean since the early 60s we've doubled
the human population
but we've slightly shrunk the amount of
land
we put under the plow every year
there's been a 68 reduction over 50
years
in the amount of land needed to produce
a given quantity of food
that's the most extraordinary phenomenon
it's basically the story of the green
revolution you make the case there too
that um without that occurring
and then that is a concept we should go
into the green revolution to some degree
because lots of
viewers won't know about that on
unbelievably even though
it might it's arguably the biggest story
of the last 50 years in some sense
you know you make the case that had the
green revolution not taken place
and so that was partly a consequence of
careful breeding of new food stuffs like
dwarf wheat
and and the the manufacture of nitrogen
fixing fertilizers
we would have already used up land space
equivalent
to more than the entire amazonian
rainforest we would have converted
virtually all arable land on earth into
food producing
well into food production and we haven't
done that and in fact
i believe now there are more trees in
the northern hemisphere than there were
a hundred years ago
oh yes definitely i mean the whole world
is now reforesting fairly rapidly
when i say the whole world the world is
net reforesting
some places are still losing forest but
on the whole places like china are
gaining
gaining uh woodland at an extraordinary
rate yeah
well china has more woodland now than it
did 30 years ago
despite the fact that well they just
declared this week or last week the
chinese government
just declared the eradication of extreme
poverty in china and
you know you can be cynical about that
and claim that it's a totalitarian
it's totalitarian what would you call um
a posturing but it's certainly the case
that even by un
standards we've almost we're on track to
eradicate extreme poverty by
according to the un definition of
extreme poverty by 2030
and we've halved it since from the year
2000 i believe to the year 2010 it was
cut in half
which is it's absolutely phenomenal 60
of the world was lived in extreme
poverty when i was born
today it's less than 10 percent that's
the greatest achievement of any human
generation ever
it's nobody's lived through anything
like that in the past yes and that
despite the fact that the population
what tripled yes well yes
um and uh and nobody saw it coming
and it wasn't planned even most of it
came about because of
uh you know relatively local innovation
to make farming more efficient and
things like that and the amount of
calories available per
head have gone up on every continent
including africa
there is still extreme poverty and
extreme
hunger and malnutrition and
nutrient shortages and so on um but
the thing i always say to
environmentalists is
why do you think it would motivate
people
to tell them that this problem is
insoluble
why not say look how well we've done in
the past
why don't we try and do just as well in
the future it's
especially the case this is something
that really confuses me too because
i worked i didn't i generated partly
generated a u.n report
contributed to a u.n report about six or
seven years ago
on sustainable development and i had the
same sort of realization that you
described was that
on all these dimensions where we were
supposed to be you know
careening towards catastrophe we were in
fact doing better and better
with the possible exception i think of
oceanic management but
we don't have to get into that i agree
with that yeah yeah it's like the
oceanic management is a catastrophe but
it's
it could still be rectified and it seems
to be a
tragedy of the commons catastrophe and
in any case everywhere i looked at the
actual statistics the
the evidence was that things were
getting better fast and like
really fast fast in an unparalleled
manner
but what really got me was that
the evidence as far as i can tell is
clear
that as soon as you make people rich
enough so that they're not living hand
to mouth
then they start to become concerned with
environmental degradation
and so the biggest contributor to
pollution
you could make a case a strong case the
biggest contributor to pollution isn't
wealth but
poverty and then if you raise people out
of poverty
then they start to manage their
environments properly because they can
afford to look at the
long run and so you'd think that for the
radical types who are
hyper concerned according to their own
self-description
with poverty and oppression as well as
environmental degradation
that they would look at the facts and
say oh my god we can have our cake and
eat it too
the faster we make people rich the
better off the planet is going to be
completely this is so clear to me and
it's so hard to get across
to to a lot of the environmentalists and
by the way there's a word i want to
introduce
the conversation at this point which is
panglossian people sometimes accuse me
of being panglossian
dr panglos as you remember in candide in
in
voltaire's novel is someone who says
he's a
he's a caricature of leibniz um and he
says that
all is for the best in the best of all
possible worlds and yes
lisbon has been destroyed by an
earthquake but that must have been
because they were evil people because
god wouldn't do a bad thing and it's a
very silly
argument and it's being lampooned by
voltaire
um but actually the people who say that
now are not you and me
we're saying good as this world is
compared with what it was
it's a veil of tears compared with what
it could be
if we press on we're not saying we've
got to the best possible world
we're saying let's keep going but the
people who are saying that who are
saying
oh we mustn't do any more development we
must make sure that people still live in
mud huts
you outline data indicating that one of
the responses by the
catastrophists let's say of the 1960s
was to
write off places like india and and
proclaim that even aid was futile
because
all you were doing was encouraging
increasing starvation in the future
when i was writing the rational optimist
in 2010
the it was quite fashionable
still to write off africa
to say yes asia has seen extraordinary
improvements in living standards
but it is very unrealistic to assume
that that could ever happen in africa
people would say that kind of thing
quite often um
and in my book i said
look even in africa we are seeing
incredible improvements
um well the fastest and so i got
criticized by a reviewer
in the new york times um for using the
phrase even in africa that showed i was
a racist apparently you know you can't
win can you
i'm saying the opposite um but now
10 years on africa's had an incredible
decade actually much better than the
west which has had a rather grim decade
of low productivity and
the overhang of the great recession and
so on but you know countries like
ethiopia have doubled their income
per capita in in real terms in a decade
you've seen malaria mortality collapse
you've seen hiv mortality falling
fast you've seen warfare disappearing
from much of the continent
you've seen an emerging middle class
you've seen far less hunger and
malnutrition
actually africa is just doing roughly
what asia did a generation ago
and it will soon be where asia is now
which is a
middle-class middle-income uh continent
um that's an incredible thing and
it it well in africa africa has has
unparalleled
potential i read an analysis probably 15
years ago
i believe it was by the former ceo of
alcoa the aluminum company
who was working for a republican
government as a as a
as a cabinet member at that point i'm
afraid i can't remember his name
but he
visited uganda and was very curious
about its potential
with regards to agriculture and
calculated first of all uganda
apparently sits on a water table that's
only about 200 feet down and it's very
fertile
he calculated maybe this wasn't his
calculation but he reported that uganda
alone could feed all of africa yeah
and so there's there's no reason to
assume that
um despite the fact for example i think
it's nigeria
is on course to be the world's most
populous country by the year 2100
i think the demographic projections are
that it will surpass china by that point
yes that that i believe that's true and
that's that's quite an interesting
thought isn't it but
no i mean just just to cast your mind
forward to the year 2100
i think we will be producing food an
awful lot of it from factories by then
by factories i mean
vertical farms you know indoor led lit
um uh uh multi-story um
uh operations that why led lit why led
lift because leds are so cheap they use
so little electricity
and produce so little heat that you can
actually start to make indoor farming
make sense because light was was the was
the big problem for farming
you had to be outdoors for the light
because the plants don't grow except in
sunlight
but the the led revolution has made a
big difference there
and you know i can imagine us having you
know basically
some indoor farms the size of uganda
that feed the world
and the rest of the planet yes we'll
have hobby farming and we'll
we'll have grass-fed beef in here and
there and so on but an awful lot of the
rest of it will be one
giant national park in which we will
allow nature to thrive
and allow people to allow people to to
operate as
tourists i mean increasingly
ecologically pristine areas pay for
themselves with tourism
and so that brings them into the economy
which is an almost certain way of
preserving them
yeah so and i suspect we'll bring back
some extinct species by then as well
so you talk about you talk as well about
i'm going to list a few things here so
we talked about feeding 9 billion and
that that's become a possibility
you talk about the triumph of cities and
the escape from malthus
so maybe we could talk about that
briefly and the end of slavery as well
which
that's a lovely one because yeah that's
unheralded
i would say get partly because i i think
people don't really understand how
universal
slavery or near slavery was across
civilizations for
for the entirety of human of of of human
human history so triumph of cities
well people are moving into cities uh
cities are where innovation happens on
the whole they're disproportionately
innovative
they're the bigger they are the the more
efficient they are in
some sense they you they have fewer gas
stations
fewer miles of road per person than
bigger cities if you see what i mean you
know
they become more concentrated um uh
more than half the world now lives in
cities that leaves the rest of the
landscape
untrampled um cities only occupy about
three percent of the world's land
surface
uh i believe um uh so
uh actually it's a good thing because
and and you know
yes you you know some of us like to live
in rural areas
rather than in in cities um but those of
us who want to can do that
cities are where people come together
and they mix and they have ideas and
they
and they produce baby ideas you know so
it was the city-states of ancient greece
or the city-states of
of renaissance italy that really drove
the world economy in their day
likewise in britain and victorian times
or california today you know california
is two great big city states los angeles
and
san francisco effectively um uh and
um so i think i i i think the fact that
the world
is becoming more urbanized or was until
the last
year i mean it'll be interesting to see
whether
city centers really do lose their
allure after the pandemic because a lot
of businesses have discovered that they
don't need to pay for expensive real
estate
they can let people work from home i
suspect it'll lead to a lot more
hot desking you know people coming into
the office two or three days a week
working from home two or three days a
week
which will cut down on commuting make
some of the city's problems
less bad um uh and cut the cost of real
estate in the middle of cities
uh so i suspect we're in that we could
have quite a soft landing for some of
the problems that cities have
these days but it won't all be plain
sailing i mean things are going to go
wrong in that respect
escape from malthus well the malthusian
trap was robert malthus's
notion was that the um
that if you uh kept people alive
they would simply uh you know if you
gave them more food
then they would simply have more babies
so they'd end up just as poor
and just as hungry yeah well something
like that happened in ireland when
when potatoes became the dominant crop
and then failed right so the irish pop
you you outline this in your book it's
not an idea that originates with
me when the irish started to farm
potatoes their population exploded
and then a blight came in and wiped out
the potato crop and and
blew out the irish population and that's
a classic malthusian example
yeah pessimistic biologists
yeah and he wasn't entirely wrong in
that respect but the thing he did get
wrong
is that technology might change it and
we then
moved to a world in which um
food became more and more productive
babies stopped dying we got better at
keeping them alive
and weirdly once they stopped dying
people started having fewer of them and
this is a phenomenon called the
demographic transition that took us
really by surprise you know if
if you stop baby rabbits dying they have
more babies
but if you stop baby human beings dying
people say
right i'm not going to try and have as
many kids as possible
in the hope that a few survive i'm going
to have two
and try that through that's another
thing that's that's occurred very very
rapidly in the last few generations that
no one predicted is that
the the the rate of reproduction is
plummeted
and increasingly across the world it
looks like as soon as you educate women
open up the marketplace to them and
provide a modicum of birth control as
well as these other
improvements and living standard that
you described that the birth rate
plummets to below rep
to below uh replacement yeah no in an
awful lot of countries
are going to have problems with below
replacement fertility in the in this
coming
century which means that you've got a a
very
aging workforce uh which won't be able
to afford retirement because there's not
enough working people and so on you know
so that's another problem you've got but
it's
it's better than a population explosion
continuing to the point where there's 20
billion people trying to live on the
planet
which is what we were worried about 40
years ago i think the projections now
are there we're going to peak out at
about 11 billion something like that
that's the un median projection but a
lot of people think it's overblown
actually that the numbers
if you run the numbers with sensible you
know if it it
a lot depends on how fast the nigerian
birth rate comes down as you said
earlier
right but with a sensible assumption we
might not even get much past 10 billion
well it'd be really quite remarkable if
if an emergent problem for the latter
half of the 20th century was that there
there was too many goods and not enough
people
and that that could easily be the case
that could easily be the case especially
not enough young people
um but bray so maybe the answer to
malthus is
sort of hidden in some sense um inside
the presumptions you made in your book
so
maybe we could pause it as a general
biological rule is
if the rate of sexual reproduction of
ideas exceeds the rate of sexual
reproduction of human beings then
there's no malthusian catastrophe
that's a very nice way of putting it i
think that is exactly it's exactly the
point i like to make yeah
well it's it's it's it's it's possible
it see
it certainly seems to me to be possible
given that we are clearly able to make
more and more using less and less
and you know there's lots of things that
we're not doing that we could do
that you also touch on um one of the
things that
that strikes me as somewhat catastrophic
is the tragic underdevelopment of
nuclear power
i i've spoken with a number of people
about the possibilities of nuclear power
and
you point out in your i think it's in
how innovation works actually
that there are no shortage of
plans for much smaller nuclear reactors
that don't use water as the primary
coolant that use
salt or some other substance like that
certain salts
and that if they uh fail
they actually shut down rather than
melting down
and so that's another example i think of
where
the the environmentalists it's a broad
brush but the environmentalists got
things seriously wrong and are still
doing so because
as far as i can tell if you wanted the
question is what do you want
like if you want cheap power of the sort
that would make people
rich enough to start caring about the
environment it seems to me that you
would be a nuclear power supporter
rather than a supporter of solar or wind
power which
i think only still accounts for about
three percent of total energy needs
that's true um uh people say oh no no
that's wrong it's more than 10
you find they're referring to
electricity but electricity is only
about 25
of energy at the moment so it's it's
around three percent
comes from solar and wind but the the
real problem with solar and wind versus
nuclear nucleus is still horribly
expensive because of the way we've
regulated it and driven up its price so
our problem is how to get the price down
but the real problem is the amount of
land that solar and wind
use because they're very low density
sources of energy so you have to have a
lot of land and you need more land than
there
is you know i mean even canada has
hardly got enough land
to produce renewable energy for its
population um
and uh frankly that's going back to a
medieval
economy where you had to use the
landscape to produce energy you had to
damn the rivers and
um uh grow the crops that you then
uh and and cut down the forests you know
to to burn
it's not obvious either that wind farms
aren't a blight on the landscape
i'm afraid they are they're terrible for
birds i'm a keen bird watcher i don't
like the idea of these
these birds being devastated by onshore
and offshore wind
and you know a wind farm spends the
first
seven eight years of its life earning
back the energy that went into building
the wind turbine
you know and only after that is it net
positive
um uh and uh even then it's a huge
investment of capital
that could be doing something else you
know the point about energy is
it's the master resource it's the thing
that everybody else needs to use
so you want to make it as cheap and as
reliable as possible yes exactly and
that should be said over and over that
if you were
it seems to me that if you were truly
concerned about
the planetary fate let's say or even
more
precisely the fate of the people on the
planet that you would do everything you
could to drive the cost of energy
including the externalized costs to
something as low as possible
because it's the prerequisite for
everything else and starving people
aren't we already talked about this but
starving people
aren't good planetary stewards so even
if you
you'll notice jordan you and i have now
slipped into a slightly pessimistic
mood um in that we're finding the energy
policies of our countries
rather stupid yeah it's probably because
we're old enough so that a 90-minute
discussion
starts to become tiring
well there's that but but also you know
the identity politics stuff the the uh
the anti-enlightenment
mood of our times i can make a case
that we might just be about to
uh kill the goose that has been laying
these golden eggs
well i think look i think we should i
truly think we should avoid going there
and
i've thought about this a lot watching
people
respond for example to some of the
things that i've been talking about over
the last few years you know
there's a huge population of young and
not so young people
out there who are literally starving no
they're metaphorically starving they're
psychologically starving
for a positive but believable story
and i think that like as you pointed out
we could
decry the state of modern politics and
concern ourselves with the fact that
counterproductive economic and social
policies might be put in place for all
sorts of ideological reasons
but i actually think a much better use
of our time
is in the kind of enterprise that you've
already pursued
which is to produce a a robust counter
narrative
that's thoroughly grounded in to the
degree that that's possible
thoroughly grounded in the facts we can
say
look forget it forget about that forget
about the pessimism forget about the
policies that that pessimism would drive
we could make the assumption that we can
have our cake and eat it too we can
eradicate poverty
we can constrain relative inequality to
the point where societies are stable
and we can produce a massive increment
in environmental quality
and all that's within our grasp if
that's what we want within the next
hundred years
and ah absolutely and didn't mean you
you've you've devoted your
the last 30 years of your life at least
to to exactly that message and
i think that's a much more powerful
solution than being pessimistic about
the counter positions
you got it people need a better story
you're dead right thank you for
reminding me that that's what i think
yeah yeah exactly exactly well it's easy
it's easy to get tangled up because you
did
and politics especially moment-to-moment
politics can tangle you up badly
and knock you off your your central axis
and you know your work this is probably
a good place to end too your work is
refreshing
in in that regard there's other people
who are doing this sort of thing too
like bjorn lomberg for example and
hans rosling who are who are
and and mary and toopey who are informed
optimists
yeah both bjorn and and hans were were a
uh influences on me and uh very sadly
hans rosling's no longer with us but uh
you know
it it was a true uh bjorn's book was a
true eye opener to me
um it was about the same time i was
starting to think along the same lines
and uh
and an eye-opener to him too
exactly yeah yeah so let's i think that
would be a good place to leave it and
and we could say look you know
to the people who are listening to this
there's no reason
for a counterproductive and anti-human
pessimism
we could have a planet where there was
enough for everyone
and where there was enough for the
non-human inhabitants too
that contribute to making life rich and
there's there's no reason not to aim for
that and there's absolutely no reason
not to assume that it's within our grasp
so we want to aim properly and and
we can have what everyone seems to want
whether they're on the right or the left
when they're thinking properly which is
an eradication of
absolute poverty so no one is forced
into penary and starvation and no
children fail to develop
we can reduce the impact of relative
poverty which is an entrenched
intransigent problem but not
unaddressable and we could restore
to a large degree um or maintain and
a sustainable ecology around us
and we don't want to forget that and
drown in in
in our threat sensitivity yeah
but once but we do it by development not
by anti-development
yeah we do that by faith in you in in
human
by by faith in human beings
fundamentally
and i think it that faith i don't think
there's any reason for that faith to be
unwarranted we're not a plague on the
planet
there's there's no reason to assume that
so
anyways thank you very much for agreeing
to talk to me today and for talking to
me and
also for your books which which
they're uplifting in the proper manner
you can read them and you can think good
for us man
we're we're incrementally making the
proper sacrifices
to lift everyone's standard of living
everywhere and
more power to us and hopefully we'll
continue
well look thank you very very much
jordan it's been an honor and a pleasure
and
something i've always wanted to do to
meet you and have a conversation with
you
and uh let's hope we can have a drink in
the real world
when the pandemic's over yes god willing
wouldn't that be nice
all right so i was speaking with matt
ridley today the author of a variety of
books we discussed today we discussed
the origins of virtue which is a
lovely description at least in part of
the biological origins of morality
and an optimistic book the rational
optimist
which contains uh
an extended argument for why we
could why reasonable people could
sustain an optimistic and positive view
of a
future in which everyone has more of
what they
need and want and finally
how innovation works which is matt's
most recent book
which is also a book i would really
recommend during covid times because
it's an a sequence of narratives about
the triumph of human ingenuity in small
ways and in great ways and um it's a
reminder
i would say uh it's a re
it's a reminder for gratitude there's
all these people who
came before us worked diligently and
with
no shortage of self-sacrifice frequently
to produce all these improvements that
we now
take for granted and it's it
it it'll improve your view of humanity
to read the book and since you're a
human being it's
quite good for you psychologically to
improve your view of humanity
so thank you all for listening thanks
matt
it was a pleasure thanks jordan
you